[⬅ 2020](2020.md) | [🏠 Index](00-index.md) | [2023 ➡](2023.md)

---

# B.Sc. Engineering 2nd Year Odd Examination, 2021
**Course No: Math 2117**
**Course Title: Vector Analysis & Linear Algebra**
**Time: 3 Hours**
**Full Marks: 72**

---

### SECTION - A

**1(a)** What are the vector and scalar quantity? Give some examples. If

$$
\vec{A} = 3\hat{i} - \hat{j} + 4\hat{k}
$$

$$
\vec{B} = -2\hat{i} + 4\hat{j} - 3\hat{k}
$$

and

$$
\vec{C} = \hat{i} + 2\hat{j} - \hat{k}
$$

Find the magnitude of $2\vec{A} - 3\vec{B} + 2\vec{C}$. **(04)**

**1(b)** What is meant by dot and cross product in vector analysis? Determine a unit vector perpendicular to the plane of

$$
\vec{A} = 2\hat{i} - 6\hat{j} - 3\hat{k}
$$

and

$$
\vec{B} = 4\hat{i} + 3\hat{j} - \hat{k}
$$

**(04)**

**1(c)** Find the area of a triangle with vertices at $(3, -1, 2)$, $(1, -1, -3)$ and $(4, -3, 1)$. **(04)**

**2(a)** Find the directional derivative of the scalar function $f(x, y, z) = x^2 + xy + z^2$ at the point $A(1, -1, -1)$ in the direction of the line $AB$ where $B$ has co-ordinates $(3, 2, 1)$. **(03)**

**2(b)** Show that

$$
\vec{F} = (y^2 + 2xz^2)\hat{i} + (2xy - z)\hat{j} + (2x^2z - y + 2z)\hat{k}
$$

is irrotational vector and hence find corresponding scalar potential. **(05)**

**2(c)** Show that $\bar{\nabla} \times (\bar{\nabla} \times \bar{V}) = \nabla(\nabla \cdot \bar{V}) - \nabla^2\bar{V}$. **(04)**

**3(a)** Find the angle between the surfaces $x^2 + y^2 + z^2 = 9$ and $z = x^2 + y^2 - 3$ at the point $(2, -1, 2)$. **(04)**

**3(b)** If

$$
\vec{A} = (3x^2 + 6y)\hat{i} - 14yz\hat{j} + 20xz^2\hat{k}
$$

Evaluate

$$
\int_C \vec{A} \cdot d\vec{r}
$$

the straight lines from $(0,0,0)$ to $(1, 0, 0)$ then to $(1, 1, 0)$, and then to $(1, 1, 1)$ along the paths $C$. **(04)**

**3(c)** Let

$$
\vec{F} = 2xz\hat{i} - x\hat{j} + y^2\hat{k}
$$

Evaluate

$$
\iiint_V \vec{F} dV
$$

Where $V$ is the region bounded by the surfaces $x=0, y=0, y=6, z=x^2, z=4$. **(04)**

**4(a)** State and prove Green's theorem in the plane. **(06)**

**4(b)** Verify the divergence theorem for

$$
\vec{A} = 4x\hat{i} - 2y^2\hat{j} + z^2\hat{k}
$$

Taken over the region bounded by $x^2 + y^2 = 4$, $z=0$ and $z=3$. **(06)**

---

### SECTION - B

**5(a)** What are the symmetric and skew-symmetric matrices? Show that every square matrix can be uniquely expressed as the sum of a symmetric and a skew-symmetric matrix. **(06)**

**5(b)** Find the rank of the following matrix and hence reduce it to the canonical form: **(06)**

$$
A = \begin{pmatrix}
2 & 3 & -1 & -1 \\
1 & -1 & -2 & -4 \\
3 & 1 & 3 & -2 \\
6 & 3 & 0 & -7
\end{pmatrix}
$$

**6(a)** Find the inverse of the following matrix by using row operation. **(06)**

$$
A = \begin{pmatrix}
2 & 1 & 2 \\
2 & 2 & 1 \\
1 & 2 & 2
\end{pmatrix}
$$

**6(b)** Discuss for what values of $\lambda$ the following system of equations have (i) no solution (ii) unique solution and (iii) infinite number of solutions: **(06)**

$$
\begin{aligned}
\lambda x + y + z &= 1 \\
x + \lambda y + z &= \lambda \\
x + y + \lambda z &= \lambda^2
\end{aligned}
$$

**7(a)** Find the eigenvalues and the corresponding eigen vectors of the matrix

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix}
2 & 3 \\
1 & 4
\end{bmatrix}
$$

**(06)**

**7(b)** Solve the following system of differential equations by matrix method: **(06)**

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{dx}{dt} &= 6x - 3y \\
\frac{dy}{dt} &= 2x + y
\end{aligned}
$$

**8(a)** Express $V=(1, -2, 5)$ in $\mathbb{R}^3$ as a linear combination of the vectors $U\_1 = (1, 1, 1)$, $U\_2 = (1, 2, 3)$ and $U\_3 = (2, -1, 1)$. **(04)**

**8(b)** Determine whether $(1, 1, 1, 1)$, $(1, 2, 3, 2)$, $(2, 5, 6, 4)$, $(2, 6, 8, 5)$ form a basis of $\mathbb{R}^4$. If not, find the dimension of the subspace they span. **(04)**

**8(c)** Suppose the vectors $(u, v, w)$ are linearly independent. Show that the vectors $u + v, u - v, u - 2v + w$ are also linearly independent. **(04)**

---

[⬅ 2020](2020.md) | [🏠 Index](00-index.md) | [2023 ➡](2023.md)